Title: Interactive Networks with Networkx and D3
Date: 14-12-2014
Authors: Andy Mellor
Slug: d3-networks
Tags: D3, networkx, IPython
Category: Visualisation
Status: Published

<!-- PELICAN_BEGIN_SUMMARY -->

{% notebook d3.ipynb cells[0:1] %}

<div id="d3-container-neighbours"></div>

<!-- PELICAN_END_SUMMARY -->

{% notebook d3.ipynb cells[1:3] %}

We'll generate a random Erdos-Reyni (ER) graph as a quick example, callable through the in-build Networkx function. 
ER graphs are generated by creating a set of $N$ nodes, 
and then for each potential node pairing, a coin is flipped and with probability $p$ and edge is formed. 
For small ER graphs it is likely (with probability $(1-p)^{(N-1)}$) that a node will have no edges which can be undesirable in some cases, 
hence we generate graphs untill we find one with a single connected component.

{% notebook d3.ipynb cells[4:13] %}


<div id="d3-container-degree"></div>

{% notebook d3.ipynb cells[13:15] %}

<div id="d3-container-neighbours"></div>

{% notebook d3.ipynb cells[15:16] %}

<style>
.node {stroke: #fff; stroke-width: 1.5px;}
.link {stroke: #999; stroke-opacity: .6;}
div#d3-container-neighbours { margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; position: relative;}
div#d3-container-degree { margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; position: relative;}
</style>

<script src="http://d3js.org/d3.v3.min.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

<script>
    // Parameter declaration, the height and width of our viz.
    var width2 = 600,
        height2 = 250;

    // Colour scale for node colours.
    var color2 = d3.scale.category10();

    // We create a force-directed dynamic graph layout.
    // D3 has number of layouts - refer to the documentation.
    var force2 = d3.layout.force()
        .charge(-120)
        .linkDistance(30)
        .size([width2, height2]);

    // We select the <div> we created earlier and add an <svg> container.
    // SVG = Scalable Vector Graphics
    var svg2 = d3.select("#d3-container-degree").select("svg")
    if (svg2.empty()) {
        svg2 = d3.select("#d3-container-degree").append("svg")
                    .attr("width", width2)
                    .attr("height", height2);
    }
        
    // We load the JSON network file.
    d3.json("graph.json", function(error, graph2) {
        // Within this block, the network has been loaded
        // and stored in the 'graph' object.
        
        // We load the nodes and links into the force-directed
        // graph and initialise the dynamics.
        force2.nodes(graph2.nodes)
            .links(graph2.links)
            .start();

        // We create a <line> SVG element for each link
        // in the graph.
        var link2 = svg2.selectAll(".link")
            .data(graph2.links)
            .enter().append("line")
            .attr("class", "link");

        // We create a <circle> SVG element for each node
        // in the graph, and we specify a few attributes.
        var node2 = svg2.selectAll(".node")
            .data(graph2.nodes)
            .enter().append("circle")
            .attr("class", "node")
            .attr("r", 5)  // radius
            .style("fill", function(d) {
                // We colour the node depending on the degree.
                return color2(d.degree); 
            })
            .call(force2.drag);

        // The label each node its node number from the networkx graph.
        node2.append("title")
            .text(function(d) { return d.id; });
        
        

        // We bind the positions of the SVG elements
        // to the positions of the dynamic force-directed graph,
        // at each time step.
        force2.on("tick", function() {
            link2.attr("x1", function(d) { return d.source.x; })
                .attr("y1", function(d) { return d.source.y; })
                .attr("x2", function(d) { return d.target.x; })
                .attr("y2", function(d) { return d.target.y; });

            node2.attr("cx", function(d) { return d.x; })
                .attr("cy", function(d) { return d.y; });
        });
    });
</script>

<script src="http://d3js.org/d3.v3.min.js" charset="utf-8"></script>
     
<script>
    // Parameter declaration, the height and width of our viz.
    var width = 600,
        height = 250;

    // Colour scale for node colours.
    var color = d3.scale.category10();

    // We create a force-directed dynamic graph layout.
    // D3 has number of layouts - refer to the documentation.
    var force = d3.layout.force()
        .charge(-120)
        .linkDistance(30)
        .size([width, height]);

    // We select the <div> we created earlier and add an <svg> container.
    // SVG = Scalable Vector Graphics
    var svg = d3.selectAll("#d3-container-neighbours").select("svg")
    if (svg.empty()) {
        svg = d3.selectAll("#d3-container-neighbours").append("svg")
                    .attr("width", width)
                    .attr("height", height);
    }
    
    // We load the JSON network file.
    d3.json("graph.json", function(error, graph) {
        // Within this block, the network has been loaded
        // and stored in the 'graph' object.
        
        // We load the nodes and links into the force-directed
        // graph and initialise the dynamics.
        force.nodes(graph.nodes)
            .links(graph.links)
            .start();

        // We create a <line> SVG element for each link
        // in the graph.
        var link = svg.selectAll(".link")
            .data(graph.links)
            .enter().append("line")
            .attr("class", "link");

        //Toggle stores whether the highlighting is on
        var toggle = 0;
        //Create an array logging what is connected to what
        var linkedByIndex = {};

        for (var i = 0; i < graph.nodes.length; i++) {
            linkedByIndex[i + "," + i] = 1;
        };

        graph.links.forEach(function (d) {
            linkedByIndex[d.source.index + "," + d.target.index] = 1;
        });

        //This function looks up whether a pair are neighbours
        function neighboring(a, b) {
            return linkedByIndex[a.index + "," + b.index];
        }

        function connectedNodes() {
            if (toggle == 0) {
                //Reduce the opacity of all but the neighbouring nodes
                var d = d3.select(this).node().__data__;
                node.style("opacity", function (o) {
                    return neighboring(d, o) | neighboring(o, d) ? 1 : 0.3;
                });
                link.style("opacity", function (o) {
                    return d.index==o.source.index | d.index==o.target.index ? 1 : 0.8;
                });
                link.style("stroke-width", function (o) {
                    return d.index==o.source.index | d.index==o.target.index ? 3 : 0.8;
                });
                //Reduce the op
                toggle = 1;
            } else {
                //Put them back to opacity=1
                node.style("opacity", 1);
                link.style("opacity", 1);
                link.style("stroke-width", 1);
                toggle = 0;
            }
        }    
        
        // We create a <circle> SVG element for each node
        // in the graph, and we specify a few attributes.
        var node = svg.selectAll(".node")
            .data(graph.nodes)
            .enter().append("circle")
            .attr("class", "node")
            .attr("r", 5)  // radius
            .style("fill", function(d) {
                // We colour the node depending on the degree.
                return color(d.parity); 
            })
            .call(force.drag)
            .on('dblclick', connectedNodes);

        // The label each node its node number from the networkx graph.
        node.append("title")
        .text(function(d) { return "Node: " + d.id + "\n" + "Degree: " + d.degree + "\n" + "Katz: " + d.katz;});
        
        // We bind the positions of the SVG elements
        // to the positions of the dynamic force-directed graph,
        // at each time step.
        force.on("tick", function() {
            link.attr("x1", function(d) { return d.source.x; })
                .attr("y1", function(d) { return d.source.y; })
                .attr("x2", function(d) { return d.target.x; })
                .attr("y2", function(d) { return d.target.y; });

            node.attr("cx", function(d) { return d.x; })
                .attr("cy", function(d) { return d.y; });        
            
        });
    });
</script>